# Cycle count test for common operations and special functions

This test can be used to count device cycles for some common
operations and special functions on CUDA devices. It is used to
produce Table 1 and Figure 4 in the manuscript.

This particular test does not currently support other devices,
such as ROCm devices, CPUs etc.

## Setup

Compiling the test requires CUDA. Make sure that CUDA is
installed and that the ``CUDA_HOME`` environment variable is set
to the root directory of the CUDA installation.

You may want to edit the ``Makefile`` and set the ``ARCH``
variable to the GPU architecture of your device (e.g., ``sm_90``
for a device with compute capability 9.0, i.e., NVIDIA's Hopper
architecture). A list of compute capabilities for NVIDIA's devices
is found on [NVIDIA's website](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-gpus).
The ``NVCC`` variable could also be changed if the NVCC compiler
is not found in the PATH.

In order to compile the test, run ``make`` or ``make main``.

## Running

To run the test without profiling, use either ``make run``
or ``./main``.

To run with the NVIDIA Nsight Compute profiler, a command such as
``ncu -o prof --set basic --metrics smsp__sass_thread_inst_executed_op_dadd_pred_on.sum,smsp__sass_thread_inst_executed_op_dmul_pred_on.sum,smsp__sass_thread_inst_executed_op_dfma_pred_on.sum,smsp__sass_thread_inst_executed_op_fadd_pred_on.sum,smsp__sass_thread_inst_executed_op_fmul_pred_on.sum,smsp__sass_thread_inst_executed_op_ffma_pred_on.sum ./main``
can be used.

## Estimated required time

- Compiling: around 12–13 minutes on TACC Vista (single core)
- Profiling: around 1 minute on TACC Vista

## Analysis

The output file from the profiling, ``prof.ncu-rep`` in the
example above, may be around 115 MiB in size and can be opened
with the GUI tool ``ncu-ui``. In the UI, quantities of interest
can be collected for each of the following kernels:

- ``kernel_test_fma`` (DFMA)
- ``kernel_test_add`` (DADD)
- ``kernel_test_mul`` (DMUL)
- ``kernel_test_div`` (division)
- ``kernel_test_sqrt`` (square root)
- ``kernel_test_rsqrt`` (reciprocal square root)
- ``kernel_test_expn`` (exponential)
- ``kernel_test_erf`` (error function)
- ``kernel_test_erfc`` (complementary error function)
- ``kernel_test_sinh`` (hyperbolic sine)
- ``kernel_test_i0`` (Bessel function I0)
- ``kernel_test_j0`` (Bessel function J0)
- ``kernel_test_j1`` (Bessel function J1)
- ``kernel_test_erfx`` (erf(x)/x)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M3`` (rational approximation of erf(x)/x with M=3)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M4`` (M=4)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M5`` (M=5)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M6`` (M=6)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M7`` (M=7)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M8`` (M=8)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M10`` (M=10)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M12`` (M=12)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M13`` (M=13)
- ``kernel_test_rat_M14`` (M=14)

The following quantities of interest could be collected for each
kernel:

- Cycles

- The number of DADD, DMUL, DFMA, FADD, FMUL, FFMA instructions
  executed by each kernel (as collected by the extra metrics
  given on the command line).

For example, the output might look like this for the
``kernel_test_fma`` kernel:

- Cycles: 1,295,109 (the exact number may vary)
- DADDs: 6,708,789,248
- DMULs: 1,048,576
- DFMAs: 3,355,443,200
- FADDs: 0
- FMULs: 0
- FFMAs: 0

In this example, the tests are using an array of size 1,048,576
(8 MiB), and one GPU thread for each entry of the array. For each
thread, the function that the kernel is testing is called 3200
times. Hence, for the FMA kernel, the number of DFMAs is
1,048,576 × 3200 = 3,355,443,200.

Based on the first three kernels (``kernel_test_fma``, ``kernel_test_add``,
``kernel_test_mul``), one can compute the number of cycles per
DADD, DMUL and DFMA (since there are no special function calls in
these kernels).

One can then compute the number of cycles per special function
call for the remaining kernels (subtracting off the baseline
DADDs and DMULs). The result of doing this is shown in Table 1 in
the manuscript.

## File list

- ``Makefile``: the Makefile for compiling
- ``README.md``: this file
- ``generate_rational_code.py``: used to generate the file
  ``rational_code_xmax6.cu`` which is included by ``main.cu``,
  based on data in ``rational_coefficients_xmax6.txt``
- ``main.cu``: the main code file
- ``rational_code_xmax6.cu``: generated by ``generate_rational_code.py``
- ``rational_coefficients_xmax6.txt``: input for ``generate_rational_code.py``

## To do

- Include the code that generates ``rational_coefficients_xmax6.txt``
  in the first place.
- Include the analysis script that is used to process the output
  from the profiling.
